In war, when the chips are down and the odds
are against a military unit, it can be time
to defy common sense and get creative.
Of course real life has been full of many
instances of small, overpowered armies trying
unusual tactics and getting destroyed, but
since there’s no novelty value they quickly
get forgotten by history.
Which just makes it all the more amazing when
some comparatively small or ill-equipped band
of soldiers wins the day against what seems
like an overwhelming force.
10.
Battle of Gaugamela
This 332 BC battle was the last one between
the Persian empire under the dominion of Darius
III and Macedonia’s own Alexander the Great.
Although those who’ve seen the films from
the 300 series might be inclined to think
that the Persian armies were overconfident
and incompetent, Darius had at least planned
this battle well.
He chose a big, open area where his army of
over 240,000 would not be cramped in any way
and had the ground swept to help his 200 chariots
function at peak capacity.
When Alexander’s 47,000 person army approached,
Alexander was intimidated enough that he called
a halt for a day to plan his strategy.
The next day, the Greeks approached the Persians
at a forty-five degree angle with the left
wing jutting towards the Persians, knowing
that it would entice the Persians to try to
send all their cavalry around that wing, which
they promptly did.
Darius also sent his chariots at the Greeks,
which were dealt with by the simple but effective
method of literally stepping out of the way
of them, waiting for the charioteers to stop
and try and turn around, then descending on
them en masse.
Alexander left his camp with all of his supplies
and booty unguarded, which induced much of
the Persian cavalry to go raid it instead
of fighting the Greeks, so Darius was drawn
over to the left wing of the Greek army where
hopefully he could regain control.
When he was within range, Alexander and his
famous personal guard, the Companions, charged
Darius’s personal guard and overwhelmed
them, throwing such a scare into Darius that
he personally fled the battle and sapped the
Persian army of its fighting spirit, effectively
turning control of the Persian Empire to Alexander.
9.
Battle of Chancellorsville
During this 1863 American Civil War battle,
the Northern army had 134,000 soldiers while
the Southern Army had 62,000.
As if that wasn’t enough advantage, bear
in mind that this Southern Army was full of
troops that were constantly hungry and a lot
of them were barefoot.
The two armies faced off across the Rappahannock
River in Virginia (a few dozen miles north
of the Southern capital of Richmond and basically
instant victory for the North if they captured
it).
Then the Northern commander, Joseph Hooker,
decided that he would keep half of his huge
army in their current position to distract
the southerners while 70,000 went far downriver,
crossed in secret, then came up the rear of
the Southern lines to hit them on the flank.
Lee’s response was basically to use Hooker’s
own strategy against him.
He sent about a third of his already tiny
army to go behind the 70,000 soldiers that
had just been coming up behind him.
To convince the Northerners that their tiny
flanking unit was actually the whole army
retreating, the Southerners looped around
and marched down the same route before making
the twelve mile trek into the Northern army’s
rear.
When they attacked, it so unnerved Hooker
that by the next day his army was already
mostly in retreat.
It’s worth noting that the results of this
battle were that it cost the life of Stonewall
Jackson, one of their three best generals,
and made General Robert E. Lee dangerously
overconfident for the Battle of Gettysburg,
where he effectively ruined the South’s
last hope of victory.
Sometimes the worst thing an army can do is
be wildly successful.
8.
Battle of Muret
Alexander’s strategy of drawing the enemy
commander into a position of personal vulnerability
was taken to another level during this 1213
battle near the city of Muret, between French
under Simon Montfort and invading Spanish
soldiers under Peter II.
Since there were only less than French knights
and more than 34,000 on the opposing side,
conventional tactics were out of the question,
so Montfort decided to go a much more direct
route.
He ordered his knights that they could not
linger, no matter how stiff the resistance
was, that they must constantly press forward
until they had killed Peter II himself.
While Peter II spread his forces out for a
conventional battle, Montfort went straight
for Peter in a do or die proposition that
paid off when the Spanish army melted around
them after he killed the enemy king.
7.
Battle of Singapore
At the start of the Japanese war with Britain
during World War II in 1941, the group of
islands called Singapore was considered impregnable
against Japanese forces.
It had a much larger defensive force (90,000)
than the Japanese could throw at it (65,000,
though some sources put it at much smaller).
On December 9, 1941, Japanese land forces
snuck onto the island through jungles and
swamps while the main British force was expecting
an air and sea attack and had placed their
troops on the other side of the island, expecting
a naval invasion.
To maintain speed at the risk of looking silly,
their infantry travelled on bicycles when
they reached solid land, stripping down in
many cases to sports jerseys.
They also found an abandoned British armored
car which listed all their defensive positions
in it, allowing the Japanese to hit their
targets perfectly and capturing all their
targets much earlier than they expected, including
the valuable British airfields.
When they did that, the Japanese planes were
easily able to sink the warships that were
sent to bolster the island defenses.
As the Japanese rode along, they quickly wore
out the tires on their bikes and started riding
on the rims, and even that worked to their
advantage because the sounds of clattering,
rimless bikes sounded to the British like
tanks, and assuming that more Japanese tanks
were coming led to more retreats.
Ultimately, tens of thousands of British soldiers
were taken prisoner and one of their most
important bases was lost.
6.
Battle of Sabine Pass II
For this 1863 American Civil War battle on
the Texas coast, the North brought 4,000 troops
and four ships with eighteen cannons.
The South, by contrast, had six cannons and
44 troops, which was less an army than a chorus
line.
Also one of those cannons was in such bad
shape that it was quickly out of commission.
And the Northern cannons were powerful enough
that they could bombard the tiny fort while
staying out of range of the Southern artillery.
The Southerners went out and put out markers
around the field where they knew the enemy
was coming meaning for the Southerners could
aim with uncanny accuracy.
It wasn’t an act of clever planning but
just because the Southerners were bored.
It hugely increased the accuracy of their
cannon fire when four Northern gunboats came
within range and in only half an hour, they
had sunk two of the attacking vessels and
convinced the other two to retreat, which
was enough to convince the Northern commander
to call it off landing the rest of their troops.
So the Southerners took three hundred prisoners.
It was a good thing the thirty-six Southerners
didn’t suffer any casualties or they probably
wouldn’t have been able to handle so many.
5.
Battle of Leuthen
Frederick the Great was one of Germany (then
Prussia’s) most effective generals in addition
to his abilities as a king.
It was vital to the survival of Germany to
this day since in Seven Years War in the 1750s
Prussia was at war with Austria, Sweden, Russia,
and France at once and his armies were outnumbered
more than three to one.
In this 1757 battle he defeated an Austrian
army twice the size of his through a method
as simple on paper as it would be difficult
to pull off in practice.
He began by arraying his army in a long line,
then marching towards the north wing of the
enemy, compelling the Austrians to move much
of their army up there despite their massive
numerical advantage.
Frederick then ordered his soldiers to turn
to their right effectively as one, and then
run down to the south in formations that instantly
became columns, then run around the enemy
on their left flank, catching the Austrians
completely off guard with how fast they moved
in formation.
The Austrian army was so large and bewildered
that as they attempted to fold their line
in half, their troops became a confused mess,
which Prussian artillery could easily cut
down.
The victory in this battle was vital to keeping
Prussia alive to the end of the war.
4.
Battle of Longewala
While there certainly have been larger scale
battles described in this list, the situation
in this 1971 battle was no less dramatic than
any of the others.
It pitted thousands of Pakistanis with dozens
tanks as part of a surprise invasion of India
against less than 120 unprepared Indian soldiers
with a jeep.
The only hope the Indians had was a chance
of air support if they held out overnight.
One of the tricks the Indians used to halt
the advance of the Pakistanis was to lay phony
“minefields” in the form of areas hastily
ringed with barb wire, which was conventionally
how minefields were designated.
This allowed the Indians to funnel the Pakistanis
into deep sands, which bogged down their tanks
so much that some of them caught fire.
These tactics combined to stall the Pakistanis
until an air strike in the morning.
The Indians only suffered an incredibly light
two casualties while the Pakistanis lost hundreds
of vehicles, completely halting their advance.
3.
Battle of Auerstadt
Although Napoleon Bonaparte hogged pretty
much all the glory the French military won
in the first few decades of the nineteenth
century as far as the public knows, their
victory won at longest odds was won by his
subordinate, Field Marshal Davout.
In October 1806, Napoleon was preparing to
attack what he thought was the main Prussian
army while he sent Davout north with 26,000
men to cut off any desperate retreats by the
Prussians towards the Russian army.
It turned out he had it backwards, because
the main Prussian army of 63,000 men was coming
for Davout, with odds of much more than two
to one.
Initially the French troops dug in as best
they could and held off initial assaults,
but after some time, Davout realized that
if the Prussians were not attacking with their
full force, there must be something with their
organizational structure.
So Davout ordered his final reserve troops
instead to attack, which would have seemed
like suicide at such great odds.
But instead, it caught the Prussians by surprise
and routed them.
Napoleon repaid Davout for his trouble by
dismissing his victory.
He claimed Davout had exaggerated the size
of the Prussian army by saying he “saw double”
(he didn’t, the Prussians own records attested
to it) then taking years to give his best
general any honors.
Some people it just doesn’t pay to be loyal
to.
2.
Battle of Alesia
In 52 BC, the Roman Army numbering 50,000-60,000
under Julius Caesar confronted the 90,000
Gaulish (French) army under King Vercingetorix
(who was sufficiently skillful that he united
a bunch of Gaulish tribes for the first time
in history) around the community of Alesia
atop a big round hill.
Vercingetorix had beaten Caesar during a previous
battle, so Caesar was not about to just attack
the Gauls in their stronghold.
But the Gauls did not want to press the attack
either as legions had also beaten them in
numerous other battles.
And anyway, Alesia was basically unassailable,
so why risk it?
So Caesar instead built an array of defensive
towers (as much as ten feet high), trenches,
and obstacles around the village that stretched
eighteen kilometers, as if Caesar had brought
WWI to France a couple millennia early.
Before the fortifications were completed,
a group of Gaulish cavalry escaped and Caesar
knew inevitably they’d be back with a large
relief army.
So he built a second, fifteen mile outer ring
of defenses facing the other way, like a general
trying to hold a castle while only controlling
the outer wall with a huge army outside and
the inner sanctum controlled by the enemy.
When the 100,000 strong relief army showed
up and attack the Romans at the same time
the ones inside the ring of defenses tried
to attack as well.
Each time it looked like the Gauls were about
to break through, Caesar sent German cavalry
to attack the attacking forces at any point
of the line on the flank and rear until the
Vercingetorix’s supplies were exhausted
and he surrendered.
1.
Battle of Saragarhi
This battle will be much different from the
others, for in this case it ended up costing
the outnumbered everything.
But it was a huge, nearly impossible victory
in a larger sense.
It won a war.
During an 1897 uprising in Pakistan, Saragarhi
was a communications outpost defended by twenty-one
Sikh soldiers.
It stood between Fort Gulistan, an undermanned
but vital stronghold for the British presence
in Pakistan and an army of 10,000 Pashtun
rebels that were very determined to take Gulistan.
After refusing offers to surrender at 9:00
a.m., they held off the attackers until well
into the afternoon, when a breach in their
defenses opened and the few surviving defenders
had to retreat to a blockhouse.
The Pashtuns ultimately didn’t finish off
the final Sikh soldiers, needing instead to
resort to burning the building down.
But at the end twenty-one soldiers had held
off 10,000 long enough the at the main fort
and prize was reinforced and defeated the
attackers, meaning that overall the last stand
had won the Sikhs the day even at the cost
of their lives.
Reports of the number of casualties the Sikhs
inflicted vary, but the lowest of them is
180 and it came from their enemies who’d
have little reason to exaggerate how effectively
the Sikhs had fought against them.